Over the last decade, pairings on elliptic curves have been a very active area of research in cryptography. Pairings map pairs of points on an elliptic curve into the multiplicative group of a finite field. Their unique properties have enabled many new cryptographic protocols that had not previously been feasible.

Pairing-Based Crypto (PBC) is emerging as a solution to complex problems that proved intractable to the standard mathematics of Public-Key Cryptography such as Identity-Based Encryption, whereby the identity of a client can be used as their public key 11.

Standards bodies have already begun standardizing various pairing-based schemes. These include the IEEE, ISO, and IETF. Besides identity-based encryption (IBE), the standardized schemes include identity-based signatures, identity-based signcyption, and identity-based key establishment mechanisms. It is hoped that the Milagro project will become a safe island of innovation for cryptographers interested in productizing pairing protocols that solve real world security issues. Aside from multi-factor authentication and certificate-less TLS, there exists green fields in the area of attribute based encryption and homomorphic encryption where pairing-based cryptography can advance the state of the art.

A popular dimension of pairing-based cryptography are identity based cryptosystems. Pairing based cryptography enables the identity of a private key to be issued in the ID of the verified identity of the possessor. Effectively, this removes the need for a PKI infrastructure in one fell swoop, as an issued certificate is used to bind a public / private key pair to an identity. This enables the management and identity of the keys to take place within the cryptosystem itself. As a result, Milagro's distributed cryptosystem design goals seek to deliver a platform that is much easier to scale and manage that traditional PKI.

In 2015, NIST (the 'post-NSA' NIST) goes so far as to recommend standardization of pairing based cryptography in their publication, Report of Pairing-based cryptography.

They write, "Based on the study, the report suggests an approach for including pairing-based cryptography schemes in the NIST cryptographic toolkit. As we have seen, pairing-based cryptography has much to offer. Pairing-based schemes, such as IBE, provide special properties which cannot be provided through traditional PKI in a straightforward way. Therefore, pairing-based cryptographic schemes would make a nice addition to NIST’s cryptographic toolkit. In particular, we have focused attention on IBE. IBE simplifies key management procedures of certificate-based public key infrastructures. IBE also offers interesting features arising from the possibility of encoding additional information into a user’s identity.  It has been a decade since the first IBE schemes were proposed. These schemes have received sufficient attention from the cryptographic community and no weakness has been identified.”
